Document how to migrate an existing Postgres cluster to a Patroni managed cluster. (#4521)
EnterpriseDB/docs: advocacy_docs/supported-open-source/patroni/migrating.mdx

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml switchover test_cluster --leader postgres-node-1 --candidate postgres-node-2 --scheduled now --force
```

3. After a few seconds, check again the list of members. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml list test_cluster
```

**Note:** you should see the following information in the output of the command. Do not proceed with the next step if that is not the case:

* Value `Replica` for column `Role`, and value `0` for column `Lag in MB`, for row `postgres-node-1`.
* Value `Leader` for column `Role`, for row `postgres-node-2`.

4. Perform a switchback between `postgres-node-1 ` and `postgres-node-2`. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml switchover test_cluster --leader postgres-node-2 --candidate postgres-node-1 --scheduled now --force
```

**Note:** you should see the following information in the output of the command. Do not proceed with the next step if that is not the case:

* Value `Leader` for column `Role`, for row `postgres-node-1`.
* Value `Replica` for column `Role`, and value `0` for column `Lag in MB`, for row `postgres-node-2`.

> If you were able to get here and see the expected outputs, both switchover and switchback operations were successful, and it is very likely that your Patroni cluster is now fully operationable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you were able to get here and see the expected outputs, both switchover and switchback was successful, then congratulations your Patroni cluster is now fully operational.
```

    1. Once Postgres is able to consume all WALs between the original slots and the new slots that have been created by Patroni, then remove the [permanent slots](https://patroni.readthedocs.io/en/latest/dynamic_configuration.html#:~:text=a%20standby%20leader-,slots,-%3A%20define%20permanent%20replication) configuration. This will allow Patroni to drop the original slots.

**Note:** the above procedure was designed for minimal downtime. In any case we **strongly** recommend that you conduct these steps during a scheduled maintenance window. Also, we **strongly** recommend that you test at least a switchover/switchback operation after all the above steps have been performed.

### More detailed example

In this section we will cover an example with more detailed steps to migrate an existing Postgres cluster to a Patroni managed cluster.

For sake of simplicity we will put some notes, when relevant, considering 3 possibilities for an existing cluster, just so we do not need to repeat ourselves regarding similar steps:

1. Managed by [EFM](/efm/latest/).
2. Managed by [repmgr](/repmgr/latest).
3. With no HA tool.

For the example, the following assumptions are made:

> 1. You already have an working `etcd` cluster &mdash; refer to [Quick start on RHEL 8 - 1. Etcd](rhel8_quick_start#1-etcd)/[Quick start on Debian 11 - 1. Etcd](debian11_quick_start#1-etcd) for instructions on how to set up an `etcd` cluster. The `etcd` cluster here is composed of the following nodes:

Reviewer 2: I would suggest `refer to [Installing and configuring etcd](installing_etcd) to install and set up etcd.`

>     1. `etcd-node-1`.

Reviewer 2: Is the ordered list necessary? I'm wondering if `*` unordered list wouldn't be more readable in this assumptions list :thinking:

Author: I think so, let me change it.

    * `etcd-node-2`.
    * `etcd-node-3`.
* You have a Postgres cluster that needs to be migrated, which is composed of the following nodes:
    * `postgres-node-1` &mdash; the primary node.
    * `postgres-node-2` &mdash; a standby of `postgres-node-1`.
    * `postgres-node-3` &mdash; a standby of `postgres-node-1`.
* The existing Postgres cluster uses replication slots to control replication from primary to standbys, and they are named:
    * `slot_for_postgres_node_2` &mdash; slot used by node `postgres-node-2`.
    * `slot_for_postgres_node_3` &mdash; slot used by node `postgres-node-3`.
* You already have a few Postgres users in the cluster:
    * `postgres` with password `postgres_password` &mdash; Postgres superuser.
    * `replicator` with password `replicator_password` &mdash; used by replication connections.
    * `rewind` with password `rewind_password` &mdash; user with rights for executing `pg_rewind`.

> * You are running PostgreSQL 15 with the following characteristics:

Author: I missed changing that, will push a commit in a few.

> * You are running PostgreSQL 15 with the following characteristics:

Author: Done!

    1. Postgres is running on port `5432`.
    2. Postgres data directory is `/var/lib/pgsql/15/data`.
    3. Postgres binaries directory is `/usr/pgsql-15/bin`.

> 6. You already have installed Patroni in the Postgres nodes.

Reviewer 2: `installed Patroni on the Postgres nodes.`?

* The systemd unit names are:
    * `postgres` &mdash; for Postgres.
    * `patroni` &mdash; for Patroni.
    * `edb-efm` &mdash; in case EFM is being used in the existing cluster.
    * `repmgrd` &mdash; in case repmgr is being used in the existing cluster.

> * The configuration files are:

Author: Just because we don't use the EFM configuration file anywhere in the steps. Would you prefer that we mention just in case?

    1. `/etc/patroni.yml` &mdash; for Patroni.
    2. `/etc/repmgr.conf` &mdash; in case repmgr is being used in the existing cluster.
9. The cluster name is `test_cluster`. This is relevant only for EFM and Patroni.

**Notes:**

* Please adapt the example names according to your actual cluster.

> * Setting up Watchdog and HAProxy are out of the scope of this example. However, as they are part of the recommended architecture, we recommend you read the following documentation:

Reviewer 2: `you should read`?

    * About Watchdog:

>         * [Quick start on RHEL 8 - 3. Watchdog](rhel8_quick_start#3-watchdog)/[Quick start on Debian 11 - 3. Watchdog](debian11_quick_start#3-watchdog) &mdash; set up an Watchdog device.

Reviewer 2: It would be easier to simplify the link text to avoid changing this page too often if we change the QS.

Suggest:
`Quick start on [RHEL 8](...) or [Debian 11](...): set up a watchdog device`

Also, don't use capital letters for Watchdog when it's in the sentence (there are a few of them here)

        * [Quick start on RHEL 8 - 4. Patroni](rhel8_quick_start#4-patroni)/[Quick start on Debian 11 - 4. Patroni](debian11_quick_start#4-patroni) &mdash; configure Patroni to use Watchdog.
    * About HAProxy:
        * [Quick start on RHEL 8 - 5. HAProxy](rhel8_quick_start#5-haproxy)/[Quick start on Debian 11 - 5. HAProxy](debian11_quick_start#5-haproxy) &mdash; set up HAProxy.

> * This example uses Postgres 15. If you are running EDB Postgres Extended or EDB Postgres Advanced Server, then we recommend you also read the following documentation:

Reviewer 2: Postgres -> PostgreSQL
Is it really using PG 15? Isn't postgresql-15 the unit name by default on RHEL?

Author: Yes, I just assumed `postgres` unit to make it simpler. Would you have any suggestion to modify PGDATA and bin dir path so we can get out of mentioning "PostgreSQL 15"?

Author: I mean, I would like to avoid using platform specific stuff in this page.

    * Quick start on [RHEL 8](rhel8_quick_start#2-edb-postgres-advanced-or-extended-server) or [Debian 11](debian11_quick_start#2-edb-postgres-advanced-or-extended-server) &mdash; check differences in ports, binary paths, etc.
    * Quick start on [RHEL 8](rhel8_quick_start#4-patroni) or [Debian 11](debian11_quick_start#4-patroni) &mdash; how to configure Patroni to use custom Postgres binary names.

In the following subsections you will find the actual walkthrough.

#### 1. Disable current HA solution

If you have any HA solution currently managing your current cluster, then you need to disable it. If you do not have any HA solution, this section can be skipped.

If you are using EFM:

> 1. Stop all EFM agents. On any Postgres node:

Author: `efm stop-cluster` takes care of signaling all nodes to stop the EFM agent. You just need to run that once, in any node that is part of the cluster.

```bash
efm stop-cluster test_cluster
```

2. Disable the EFM systemd unit. This is required so nothing other than Patroni will try to start Postgres up. On all Postgres nodes:

```bash
systemctl disable edb-efm
```

If you are using repmgr:

> 1. Stop the repmgr daemon. On any postgres node:

Author: The same applies to repmgr, it takes care of signaling all nodes to stop monitoring.

> 1. Stop the repmgr daemon. On any postgres node:

Reviewer 3: This one I did not know. I always thought you had to pause each node. Learn something new every day :)

```bash
repmgr -f /etc/repmgr.conf service pause
```

2. Disable the repmgr systemd unit. This is required so nothing other than Patroni will try to start Postgres up. On all postgres nodes:

```bash
systemctl disable repmgrd
```

#### 2. Set up Patroni

You need to perform the following steps on all Postgres nodes. Perform all steps on one node before proceeding with the next node. Start with the primary node (`postgres-node-1`), then proceed with each standby node (`postgres-node-2` and `postgres-node-3`).

> 1. Disable Postgres systemd unit. This is required so nothing other than Patroni will try to start Postgres up. Run:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Disable Postgres systemd unit. This is required so nothing other than Patroni will try to start Postgres. Run:
```

```yaml
scope: test_cluster
name: postgres-node-1

restapi:
  listen: 0.0.0.0:8008
  connect_address: postgres-node-1:8008

etcd3:
  hosts:
  - etcd-node-1:2379
  - etcd-node-2:2379
  - etcd-node-3:2379

bootstrap:
  dcs:
    ttl: 30
    loop_wait: 10
    retry_timeout: 10
    maximum_lag_on_failover: 1048576

    postgresql:
      use_pg_rewind: true
      use_slots: true

    slots:
      slot_for_postgres_node_2:
        type: physical
      slot_for_postgres_node_3:
        type: physical

  pg_hba:
  - host replication replicator 0.0.0.0/0 scram-sha-256
  - host all all 0.0.0.0/0 scram-sha-256

postgresql:
  listen: 0.0.0.0:5432
  connect_address: postgres-node-1:5432
  pgpass: /tmp/.pgpass
  data_dir: /var/lib/postgres/data
  bin_dir: /usr/postgres/bin

  authentication:
    superuser:
        username: postgres
        password: postgres_password

    replication:
        username: replicator
        password: replicator_password

    rewind:
        username: rewind
        password: rewind_password

    parameters:
      unix_socket_directories: /tmp

tags:
  nofailover: false
  noloadbalance: false
  clonefrom: false
  nosync: false
```

> Please keep the following notes in mind about the above template configuration file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please keep in mind the following suggestions related to the configuration file from above:
```

> * It is just an example template, and you will need to change it according to your setup.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* This is just an example template, and you will need to change it according to your setup.
```

* It was created as an example configuration file for node `postgres-node-1`. Adjust accordingly for other nodes (`postgres-node-2` and `postgres-node-3`).
* Some key points about the proposed settings:

>     * `scope`: it is the name of the Patroni cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * `scope`: is the name of the Patroni cluster.
```

>     * `name`: it is the name of the managed Postgres node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * `name`: is the name of the managed Postgres node.
```

>     * `etcd3.hosts`: it contains the list of addresses to reach nodes that are part of the `etcd` cluster

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * `etcd3.hosts`: contains the list of addresses to reach nodes that are part of the `etcd` cluster
```

>     * `bootstrap.dcs.postgresql.slots`: it contains a list of slots that should be permanent, thus not dropped by Patroni when it starts running. We fill this so we can guarantee WALs will be available for replicas until they reach the LSN of the slots that are created by Patroni.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * `bootstrap.dcs.postgresql.slots`: contains a list of slots that should be permanent, thus not dropped by Patroni when it starts running. We fill this so we can guarantee WALs will be available for replicas until they reach the LSN of the slots that were created by Patroni.
```

>     * `bootstrap.pg_hba`: it contains a few basic HBA rules that Patroni will write to the `pg_hba.conf` file, so users are able to connect. Adapt it to your needs, as the rules are somehow very permissive.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * `bootstrap.pg_hba`: contains a few basic HBA rules that Patroni will write to the `pg_hba.conf` file, so users are able to connect. Adapt it to your needs, as the rules in this example are somehow very permissive.
```

* We **strongly** recommend reading the Patroni documentation about [Patroni configuration](https://patroni.readthedocs.io/en/latest/patroni_configuration.html). You will likely need to at least specify some settings through `bootstrap.dcs.postgresql.parameters` (Postgres settings that apply to all nodes - used once to populate the Patroni DCS when it is initialised) and `postgresql.parameters` (Postgres settings that apply to local node) sections of the configuration file to make the Postgres configuration compatible with what you have in your existing cluster.

3. Create or adjust the Patroni systemd unit. You can find instructions about that in the quick start on [RHEL 8](rhel8_quick_start#4-patroni) or [Debian 11](debian11_quick_start#4-patroni).

> 4. Enable the Patroni systemd unit. This is done so Patroni will automatically start up on boot and bring Postgres up. Run:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Enable the Patroni systemd unit. This is done so Patroni will automatically start up on boot and start Postgres. Run:
```

```bash
systemctl enable patroni
```

5. Start the Patroni systemd unit. This is done so you start Patroni right now. Run:

```bash
systemctl start patroni
```

#### 3. Hand over Postgres startup to Patroni

At this point Patroni is already monitoring the Postgres instances on each node. However, Postgres is still running using its own systemd unit (`postgres`). Ideally we should make Patroni start Postgres through its own means, and stop using the Postgres systemd unit.

We recommend starting with the standbys, and then proceeding with the primary. Also, we assume you can immediately restart the standbys, and that you want to restart the primary during a maintenance window. The steps:

> 1. Immediately restart of standby `postgres-node-2`. On any Postgres node:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Immediately restart of standby `postgres-node-2`. On any Postgres node run:
```

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml restart test_cluster postgres-node-2 --scheduled now --force
```

> 2. Immediately restart of standby `postgres-node-3`. On any Postgres node:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Immediately restart of standby `postgres-node-3`. On any Postgres node run:
```

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml restart test_cluster postgres-node-3 --scheduled now --force
```

3. Schedule a restart of primary `postgres-node-1` to occur during a maintenance window. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml restart test_cluster postgres-node-1 --scheduled SOME_SCHEDULE --force
```

**Note:** `SOME_SCHEDULE` should be filled with the desired timestamp in an unambiguous format (e.g. `2023-07-25T20:09`).

> Once all Postgres instances were restarted, they will be already running through Patroni instead of through the Postgres systemd unit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once all Postgres instances were restarted, they will be running through Patroni instead of through the Postgres systemd unit.
```

#### 4. Clean up slots from original cluster

At this point we assume all Postgres instances are already running through Patroni, as described in the previous section.

> As we intend to clean up slots from original cluster, before proceeding with the next steps you should confirm that both Postgres standby nodes have already received (and potentially consumed) all WAL files that exist between the replication slots that existed in the original cluster and the replication slots that were created by Patroni. In other words make sure that:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As we intend to clean up the slots from the original cluster, before proceeding with the next steps you should confirm that both Postgres standby nodes have already received (and potentially consumed) all WAL files that exist between the replication slots that existed in the original cluster and the replication slots that were created by Patroni. In other words make sure that:
```

1. `postgres-node-2` has received all WALs between the LSNs reported by these replication slots in `postgres-node-1`:
    1. `slot_for_postgres_node_2` &mdash; previously existing slot in the original cluster.
    2. `postgres_node_2` &mdash; slot automatically created by Patroni based on node name.
2. `postgres-node-3` has received all WALs between the LSNs reported by these replication slots in `postgres-node-1`:
    1. `slot_for_postgres_node_3` &mdash; previously existing slot in the original cluster.
    2. `postgres_node_3` &mdash; slot automatically created by Patroni based on node name.

> **Note:** You can use a query like the one below to check the required LSN of these slots. You need to make sure that `restart_lsn` of the slots created by Patroni are `>=` the `restart_lsn` of the original slots. On node `postgres-node-1`, through a `psql` session:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note:** You can use a query like the one below to check the required LSN of these slots. You need to make sure that the `restart_lsn` of the slots created by Patroni is `>=` then the `restart_lsn` of the original slots. On node `postgres-node-1`, through a `psql` session:
```

Author: I guess you meant `than` instead of `then`. Will fix it with a follow-up commit.

```sql
SELECT slot_name,
       restart_lsn
FROM pg_catalog.pg_replication_slots
WHERE slot_name IN (
    'slot_for_postgres_node_2',
    'postgres_node_2',
    'slot_for_postgres_node_3',
    'postgres_node_3'
)
```

> Once the above conditions are met we are then able to drop the original slots (`slot_for_postgres_node_2`, and `slot_for_postgres_node_3`). In order to do that, assuming you have not configured any other permanent slots other than `slot_for_postgres_node_2` and `slot_for_postgres_node_3`, follow these steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the above conditions are met, we are then able to let Patroni drop the original slots (`slot_for_postgres_node_2`, and `slot_for_postgres_node_3`). In order to do that, assuming you have not configured any other permanent slots other than `slot_for_postgres_node_2` and `slot_for_postgres_node_3`, follow these steps:
```

1. Remove [permanent slots](https://patroni.readthedocs.io/en/latest/dynamic_configuration.html#:~:text=a%20standby%20leader-,slots,-%3A%20define%20permanent%20replication) dynamic configuration. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml edit-config test_cluster --set "slots=null" --force
```

> 2. Wait for about 10 seconds and check that replication slots `slot_for_postgres_node_2` and `slot_for_postgres_node_3` had been dropped from `postgres-node-1` -- query `pg_replication_slots` to check that.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Wait for about 10 seconds and check that the replication slots `slot_for_postgres_node_2` and `slot_for_postgres_node_3` have been dropped from `postgres-node-1` -- query `pg_replication_slots` to check this.
```

#### 5. Test switchover and switchback

> At this point your cluster is completely managed by Patroni, so it is important to perform a switchover and switchback operation during a maintenance window to ensure Patroni is operating correctly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At this point your cluster is completely managed by Patroni, so it is important to perform switchover and switchback operations during a maintenance window to ensure Patroni is operating correctly.
```

As mentioned, you should perform the following steps during a maintenance window. As an example we will perform a switchover and switchback between `postgres-node-1` and `postgres-node-2`. The steps:

1. Check replication lag between nodes. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml list test_cluster
```

> **Note:** the output should show value `0` for column `Lag in MB`, for rows `postgres-node-2` and `postgres-node-3`. Do not proceed with the next steps if that is not the case.

Reviewer 3: I suggest pasting an example output here

Author: Sounds good, will work on that.

Author: Done!

2. Perform a switchover between `postgres-node-1 ` and `postgres-node-2`. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml switchover test_cluster --leader postgres-node-1 --candidate postgres-node-2 --scheduled now --force
```

3. After a few seconds, check again the list of members. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml list test_cluster
```

> **Note:** you should see the following information in the output of the command. Do not proceed with the next step if that is not the case:

Reviewer 3: Maybe add the output we are expecting instead of describing how it should look?

Author: Noted.

Author: Done!

* Value `Replica` for column `Role`, and value `0` for column `Lag in MB`, for row `postgres-node-1`.
* Value `Leader` for column `Role`, for row `postgres-node-2`.

4. Perform a switchback between `postgres-node-1 ` and `postgres-node-2`. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml switchover test_cluster --leader postgres-node-2 --candidate postgres-node-1 --scheduled now --force
```

> **Note:** you should see the following information in the output of the command. Do not proceed with the next step if that is not the case:

Reviewer 3: Maybe add the output we are expecting instead of describing how it should look?

Author: Noted.

Author: Done!

3. Create or adjust the Patroni systemd unit. You can find instructions about that in the quick start on [RHEL 8](rhel8_quick_start#4-patroni) or [Debian 11](debian11_quick_start#4-patroni).

4. Enable the Patroni systemd unit. This is done so Patroni will automatically start up on boot and start Postgres. Run:

```bash
systemctl enable patroni
```

5. Start the Patroni systemd unit. This is done so you start Patroni right now. Run:

```bash
systemctl start patroni
```

#### 3. Hand over Postgres startup to Patroni

At this point Patroni is already monitoring the Postgres instances on each node. However, Postgres is still running using its own systemd unit (`postgres`). Ideally we should make Patroni start Postgres through its own means, and stop using the Postgres systemd unit.

We recommend starting with the standbys, and then proceeding with the primary. Also, we assume you can immediately restart the standbys, and that you want to restart the primary during a maintenance window. The steps:

1. Immediately restart of standby `postgres-node-2`. On any Postgres node run:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml restart test_cluster postgres-node-2 --scheduled now --force
```

> 2. Immediately restart of standby `postgres-node-3`. On any Postgres node run:

Reviewer 2: same as above regarding immediately/immediate

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml restart test_cluster postgres-node-3 --scheduled now --force
```

3. Schedule a restart of primary `postgres-node-1` to occur during a maintenance window. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml restart test_cluster postgres-node-1 --scheduled SOME_SCHEDULE --force
```

> **Note:** `SOME_SCHEDULE` should be filled with the desired timestamp in an unambiguous format (e.g. `2023-07-25T20:09`).

Reviewer 2: does the timezone offset matter here?

Author: Yes, it does. Just tested it locally:

```bash
$ patronictl -c postgres0.yml switchover batman --leader postgresql0 --candidate postgresql1 --scheduled 2023-07-31T10:42-03
Current cluster topology
+ Cluster: batman -------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| Member      | Host           | Role    | State     | TL | Lag in MB |
+-------------+----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| postgresql0 | 127.0.0.1:5432 | Leader  | running   |  1 |           |
| postgresql1 | 127.0.0.1:5433 | Replica | streaming |  1 |         0 |
+-------------+----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
Are you sure you want to schedule switchover of cluster batman at 2023-07-31T10:42:00-03:00, demoting current leader postgresql0? [y/N]: y
2023-07-31 13:41:31.41675 Switchover scheduled
+ Cluster: batman -------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| Member      | Host           | Role    | State     | TL | Lag in MB |
+-------------+----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| postgresql0 | 127.0.0.1:5432 | Leader  | running   |  1 |           |
| postgresql1 | 127.0.0.1:5433 | Replica | streaming |  1 |         0 |
+-------------+----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
 Switchover scheduled at: 2023-07-31T10:42:00-03:00
                    from: postgresql0
                      to: postgresql1
```

```bash
$ date
Mon Jul 31 13:41:43 UTC 2023
```

```bash
$ patronictl -c postgres0.yml list batman
+ Cluster: batman -------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| Member      | Host           | Role    | State     | TL | Lag in MB |
+-------------+----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| postgresql0 | 127.0.0.1:5432 | Replica | streaming |  2 |         0 |
| postgresql1 | 127.0.0.1:5433 | Leader  | running   |  2 |           |
+-------------+----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
```

Once all Postgres instances were restarted, they will be running through Patroni instead of through the Postgres systemd unit.

#### 4. Clean up slots from original cluster

At this point we assume all Postgres instances are already running through Patroni, as described in the previous section.

As we intend to clean up the slots from the original cluster, before proceeding with the next steps you should confirm that both Postgres standby nodes have already received (and potentially consumed) all WAL files that exist between the replication slots that existed in the original cluster and the replication slots that were created by Patroni. In other words make sure that:

> 1. `postgres-node-2` has received all WALs between the LSNs reported by these replication slots in `postgres-node-1`:

Reviewer 2: "by the following replication slots" rather than "these replication slots"?

    1. `slot_for_postgres_node_2` &mdash; previously existing slot in the original cluster.
    2. `postgres_node_2` &mdash; slot automatically created by Patroni based on node name.

> 2. `postgres-node-3` has received all WALs between the LSNs reported by these replication slots in `postgres-node-1`:

Reviewer 2: same as above regarding _these_

**Note:** You can use a query like the one below to check the required LSN of these slots. You need to make sure that the `restart_lsn` of the slots created by Patroni is `>=` than the `restart_lsn` of the original slots. On node `postgres-node-1`, through a `psql` session:

```sql
SELECT slot_name,
       restart_lsn
FROM pg_catalog.pg_replication_slots
WHERE slot_name IN (
    'slot_for_postgres_node_2',
    'postgres_node_2',
    'slot_for_postgres_node_3',
    'postgres_node_3'
)
```

Once the above conditions are met, we are then able to let Patroni drop the original slots (`slot_for_postgres_node_2`, and `slot_for_postgres_node_3`). In order to do that, assuming you have not configured any other permanent slots other than `slot_for_postgres_node_2` and `slot_for_postgres_node_3`, follow these steps:

1. Remove [permanent slots](https://patroni.readthedocs.io/en/latest/dynamic_configuration.html#:~:text=a%20standby%20leader-,slots,-%3A%20define%20permanent%20replication) dynamic configuration. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml edit-config test_cluster --set "slots=null" --force
```

> 2. Wait for about 10 seconds and check that the replication slots `slot_for_postgres_node_2` and `slot_for_postgres_node_3` have been dropped from `postgres-node-1` -- query `pg_replication_slots` to check this.

Reviewer 2: replace **--** by parenthesis or **:**?

#### 5. Test switchover and switchback

> At this point your cluster is completely managed by Patroni, so it is important to perform switchover and switchback operations during a maintenance window to ensure Patroni is operating correctly.

Reviewer 2: _to perform **a** switchover and switchback operation_

As mentioned, you should perform the following steps during a maintenance window. As an example we will perform a switchover and switchback between `postgres-node-1` and `postgres-node-2`. The steps:

1. Check replication lag between nodes. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml list test_cluster
+ Cluster: test_cluster ------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| Member          | Host            | Role    | State     | TL | Lag in MB |
+-----------------+-----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| postgres-node-1 | postgres-node-1 | Leader  | running   |  1 |           |
| postgres-node-2 | postgres-node-1 | Replica | streaming |  1 |         0 |
| postgres-node-3 | postgres-node-1 | Replica | streaming |  1 |         0 |
+-----------------+-----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
```

> **Note:** do not proceed with the next steps if replica nodes are lagging.

Reviewer 2: for consistency: _**D**o no proceed..._ first letter upercased in the previous notes

2. Perform a switchover between `postgres-node-1 ` and `postgres-node-2`. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml switchover test_cluster --leader postgres-node-1 --candidate postgres-node-2 --scheduled now --force
```

3. After a few seconds, check again the list of members. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml list test_cluster
+ Cluster: test_cluster ------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| Member          | Host            | Role    | State     | TL | Lag in MB |
+-----------------+-----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| postgres-node-1 | postgres-node-1 | Replica | streaming |  2 |         0 |
| postgres-node-2 | postgres-node-1 | Leader  | running   |  2 |           |
| postgres-node-3 | postgres-node-1 | Replica | streaming |  2 |         0 |
+-----------------+-----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
```

> **Note:** do not proceed with the next steps if replicas nodes are lagging or not streaming

Reviewer 2: for consistency: _**D**o not proceed..._

Reviewer 2: + _if replica nodes_

> 4. Perform a switchback between `postgres-node-1 ` and `postgres-node-2`. On any Postgres node:

Reviewer 2: extra space in postgres-node-1 name

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml switchover test_cluster --leader postgres-node-2 --candidate postgres-node-1 --scheduled now --force
```

5. After a few seconds, check again the list of members. On any Postgres node:

```bash
patronictl -c /etc/patroni.yml list test_cluster
+ Cluster: test_cluster ------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| Member          | Host            | Role    | State     | TL | Lag in MB |
+-----------------+-----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
| postgres-node-1 | postgres-node-1 | Leader  | running   |  3 |           |
| postgres-node-2 | postgres-node-1 | Replica | streaming |  3 |         0 |
| postgres-node-3 | postgres-node-1 | Replica | streaming |  3 |         0 |
+-----------------+-----------------+---------+-----------+----+-----------+
```

> **Note:** replicas nodes should be streaming and not lagging.

Reviewer 2: for consistency: _**R**eplica nodes..._

> If you were able to get here and see the expected outputs, both switchover and switchback was successful, then congratulations your Patroni cluster is now fully operational.

Reviewer 2: _both switchover and switchback **were** successful_

    * `rewind` with password `rewind_password` &mdash; user with rights for executing `pg_rewind`.
* You are running PostgreSQL with the following characteristics:
    * Postgres is running on port `5432`.
    * Postgres data directory is `/var/lib/postgres/data`.
    * Postgres binaries directory is `/usr/postgres/bin`.
* You have already installed Patroni on all the Postgres nodes.
* The systemd unit names are:
    * `postgres` &mdash; for Postgres.
    * `patroni` &mdash; for Patroni.
    * `edb-efm` &mdash; in case EFM is being used in the existing cluster.
    * `repmgrd` &mdash; in case repmgr is being used in the existing cluster.
* The configuration files are:
    * `/etc/patroni.yml` &mdash; for Patroni.
    * `/etc/repmgr.conf` &mdash; in case repmgr is being used in the existing cluster.
* The cluster name is `test_cluster`. This is relevant only for EFM and Patroni.

**Notes:**

* Please adjust the example assumptions according to your environment.
* Setting up watchdog and HAProxy are out of the scope of this example. However, as they are part of the recommended architecture, you should read the following documentation:
    * About watchdog:

>         * Quick start on [RHEL 8](rhel8_quick_start#3-watchdog) or [Debian 11](debian11_quick_start#3-watchdog) &mdash; set up an watchdog device.

Reviewer 2: _set up **a** watchdog device_?

>         * Quick start on [RHEL 8](rhel8_quick_start#4-patroni) or [Debian](debian11_quick_start#4-patroni) &mdash; configure Patroni to use watchdog.

Reviewer 2: _to use **the** watchdog_?
